#46 Shlokas

Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya, after my sons and the sons of Pandu assembled in the place of pilgrimage at Kurukshetra, desiring to fight, what did they do?".

Sanjaya said, "after looking over the army arranged in the military formation by the sons of Pandu, King Duryodhana then approached his teacher and spoke the following words"

O Teacher, behold this great army of the sons of Pandu, so expertly arrayed by your disciple, the son of Drupada.

Here in this army are many mighty archers, equal in fighting to Bhima and Arjuna, great fighters like Yuyudhana, Virata and Drupada.

There are also great, heroic, powerful fighters like Dhrshtaketu, Chekitana and the Kasiraja, Purujit, and Kuntibhoja and Saibya.

They are the mighty Yudhamanyu and very powerful Uttamaujas, the son of Subhadra, and the sons of Draupadi. All of great chariots.

But for your information, O best of the brahmanas, the names of those who are the most qualified amongst ourselves, the leaders of my army!.

There are personalities like yourself, Bhishma, Karna and Kripa, the victorious in war; Asvatthama, Vikarna, and Jayadratha, the son of Somadatta.

And also many other heroes who have given up their lives for my sake All of them are well armed with various weapons and all well skilled in battle.

Our strength is immeasurable, and we are perfectly protected by Bhishma, whereas the strenth of the Pandavas, carefully protected by Bhima is limited.

All of you must now give full support to Bhishma, as you stand at your respective strategic points of entrance into several divisions of Army.

Then Bhishma, the great valiant grandsire of the Kuru dynasty, the grandfather of the fighters, blue his conchshell very loudly, making a sound like the roar of a lion, giving Duryodhana joy.

After that, the conchshells, drums, bugles, trumpets and cow-horns were all suddenly sounded and the sound was tremendous.

Then on the other side, both Madhava and the son of Pandu seated in their magnificent chariot yoked with white horses, blew their divine conches.

Hrishikesa blew his conchshell called “Panchajanya” and Arjuna blew the “Devadatta”, and Bhima, the voracious eater and the performer of herculean task, blew the great conch, “Paundra”.

Yudhisthira, the son of Kunti, blew the “Anantavijaya”; and Sahadeva and Nakula blew the “Manipushpaka” and “Sughosha” conches.

The king of Kasi, an excellent archer, Sikhandi, the mighty car-warrior, Dhristadyumna and Virata and Satyaki, the unconquered,

Drupada and the sons of Draupadi, O Lord of the Earth, and the son of Subhadra, the mighty-armed, all blew their respective conches!

The blowing of these different conchshells became uproarious. Vibrating both in the sky and on the earth, it shattered the hearts of the sons of Dhrutarashtra.

At this time Arjuna, the son of Pandu, seated in the chariot,bearing the flag marked with Hanuman, after looking at the sons of Dhrutarashtra standing arrayed, took up his bow and said the following to Krishna, O Lord of the Earth!

Arjuna said: O infallible one, please draw my chariot in the middle of the two armies, so that I may see those present here, who desire to fight and with whom I must fight when the battle begins

Let me see those who have come here to fight, wishing to please the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra.

Sanjaya said: O descendant of Bharata, having thus been addressed by Arjuna, Lord Krishna,  drew up the fine chariot in the  midst of the two armies.

In the presence of Bhishma, Drona and all the rulers of the earth, the Lord said: “Just behold, Partha. Now all these Kurus gathered together!”

There Arjuna could see, within the midst of the armies of both parties, his grandfathers and fathers, teachers, maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons and friends and also his fathers-in-law and well-wishers too.

When, the son of Kunti, Arjuna, saw all these different grades of friends and relatives, he became overwhelmed with compassion and spoke thus.

Arjuna said: My dear Krishna, seeing my friends and relatives, present before me in such a fighting spirit, I feel the limbs of my body quivering and my mouth drying up.

My whole body is trembling, my hair is standing on end, my bow Gandiva slipping from my hand and my skin is burning.

I am now unable to stand here any longer. I am forgetting myself and my mind is reeling. I see only causes of misfortune, O Keshava.

I do not see how any good can come from killing my own kinsmen in this battle, nor can I, my dear Krishna, desire any subsequent victory, kingdom or happiness.